
--- Page 0 ---
Bharativajanata Party
Modi
ki
Guarantee
2024
W
Phir EkBaar
2
-
I
A = S
Modi Sarkar
a
a
a
a
a

--- Page 1 ---
T
|
A
b
|
|
I
2 A
o 9

--- Page 2 ---
G
CA
RHIM E
1 b
a
CONTENTS
TABLE
OF
Shri Narendra Modi's Letter to the Nation 01
President's Note 03
Sankalp Patra Note 04
10 Years of Good Governance and Vikas 05
Mod Ki i Guarantee for Garib Parivar Jan 11
Modi Ki Guarantee for Middle -Class Parivar Jan 13
Modi ki Guarantee for Nari Shakti 15
Modi ki Guarantee for Young Citizens 17
Mod ki Guarantee for Senior Citizens 20
Mod ki Guarantee for Kisan Samman 22
Modi ki Guarantee for Fishermen Families 26
Modi ki Guarantee for Shrami ik Samman 28
Mod ki Guarantee for MSME, Small Traders and Vishwakarmas 30
Modi ki Guarantee for Sabka Saath Sabka Vikas 32
Mod ki Guarantee for Vishwa Bandhu Bharat 35
Mod ki Guarantee for Surakshit Bharat 38
Modi ki Guarantee for Prosperous Bharat 40
Modi ki Guarantee for Global Manufacturing Hub 42
Mod ki Guarantee for World 1-Class Infrastructure 45
Modi ki Guarantee for Ease of Living in Cities 50
Mod ki Guarantee for Virasat Bhi, Vikas Bhi 52
Modi Ki Guarantee for Good Governance 54
Modi ki Guarantee for Swastha Bharat 57
Modi ki Guarantee for Quality Education 59
Mod ki Guarantee for Sports Development 61
Modi Ki Guarantee for Balanced Regional Development 63
Mod ki Guarantee for Technology and Innovations 65
Mod ki Guarantee for Sustainable Bharat 67

--- Page 3 ---
Shri Narendra Modi's
Letter to the Nation
66
Mere Priya Parivarjan 1.
It has been a decade since you blessed Bharativa Janata Party with the responsibility of serving you The
fact that you blessed me to be your Pradhan Sevak at an extremely important time in the history of our
country inspires me to work ever harder In the last ten years, every moment of our time and every ounce of
our energy has been dedicated for the people's welfare
With your trust and support the nation has seen a massive transformation over the last ten years While
development attained an unprecedented speed and scale a significant transformation has also happened Y in
terms of mindset
Today, our youth are speaking of creating Viksit Bharat by 2047 as a goal that is attainable as a milestone
that will certainly be reached The nationis confident on its journey of becoming self-reliant ( Aatmanirbhar P I
This is a big change from the atmosphere of desperation and frustration that the nation had experienced in
the decade prior to 2014 due to the corruption policy paralysis and misrule by the government of those
times
We have gone from a nation that was in the Fragile Five' to a nation that is one of the top 5 economies of
the world. The most important facet of this progress is that the fruits of development reached everyone 2
especially those who needed it the most The mantra of Sabka Saath Sabka Vikas Sabka Vishwas Sabka
Prayas has guided our actions
The nation's growth has been powered by the victory of 25 crore people in the battle against poverty. These
are people who had suffered decades of deprivation of even basic necessities Today, not only are they
benefiting from our saturation approach in basic needs like bank accounts gas connections, toilets A water
electricity, etc but they are also being empowered with new -age facilities like optic fibre connections digital
solutions drones etc
The nation's growth has come from the drastic socio-economic transformation seen in the lives of women
farmers, fisherfolks, street vendors small entrepreneurs SC ST and OBC communities They are being
A
directly empowered through the power of technology such as the JAM trinity
Farmers have been a backbone of our nation's progress. Whether it is historic MSP hikes massive rise in
procurement or making fertilisers available to them inexpensively despite globally high prices direct income
support through PM- KISAN safety net of Fasal Bima renewed focus millets expanded access to local and
on
global markets, a number of steps have been taken to empower them Our Annadatas are also becoming
Uriadatas due to the PM KUSUM scheme Empowered by our Beei Se Bazar Tak approach our farmers have
done wonders for the country.
The nation's growth has been fueled by our focus on Vikas and Virasat
India has been setting new benchmarks in growth of both ecology and economy
W
1

--- Page 4 ---
The nation's growth has been fueled by the achievements of our youth who have not only dared to dream
big but also worked to realise dreams in various domains such as space sports and start t-ups. In the last ten
years whether it is education employment or entrepreneurship crores of new opportunities have been
created for our youth
It is deeply emotional for each Bharatiya Janata Party karyakarta including me to be involved in thi is
momentous journey as enablers of every Indian's aspirations
During an address from the ramparts of the Red Fort | had said Yahi Samay Hai. Sahi Samay Hai. Today,
|
many respected voices across the globe are also saying that this is India's time Ir fact today India is being
seen as an important player in the global efforts to create a better future
Making the best use of this historic time period needs us to be proactive. The proactive nature of our
approach is such that we have already worked on a plan of the decisions to be taken in the first 100 days of
the new government
At such a time, when our nation is ready to take off into a new phase of exponential growth the Amrit Kaal
we seek your blessings for the roadmap that we are unveiling for the next five years.
In the next five years we will take our nation into the top 3 economies of the world launch a final and
decisive assault against poverty open up newer avenues of growth in various sectors further intensify our
battle against corruption unveil the next generation of reforms and take a number of pro-people decisions
and actions.
Our Sankalp Patra is more than just a collection of promi nises. This Sankalp Patra outlines the collective
aspirations and goals of our nation by our nation and for our nation As you have seen in the last ten vears o
it is Modi's Guarantee that every promise made is fulfilled
In 2014 we received your support to bring in a monumental transformation In 2019 we received an even
bigger mandate and ensured continued development and took big decisions. In the next five years with
your blessings it is Modi's Guarantee that we will work 24by 7 for 2047
Your aspiration is our mission Your dreams are our responsibility.
Let us create a nation that future generations will be proud of!
Vande Mataram
Your Pradhan Sevak
Narendra Modi
ni .
720
7

--- Page 5 ---
President's
Note
My Dear Brothers and Sisters
|
The philosophy of f "Antyodaya" has been Bharatiya Janata Party's guiding light since its foundation This has
manifested itself in various programmes launched by our Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modiii aimed at Garib
Kalyan
In just ten years our government has achieved path -breaking milestones With Sabka Saath and Sabka Prayas
we are committed towards nation n-building and promise to ensure Sabka Vikas by strengthening Sabka
Vishwas in the BJP government. Modi ki Guarantee 2024 Sankalp Patra is our resolve to continue this progress
and progress forward in our journey
As we enter Amrit Kaal of Bharat a new Vision is now in front of us a Vision driven by the Panch Pran
enunciated by our Prime Minister The General Elections of 2024 will be crucial in defining the course of our
country. 97 crore voters have made up their minds. Citizens want to go forward Evervone wants to build the
country. People have decided to defeat the corrupt alliances.
In just ten years all of us have worked to bring Bharat from Fragile R to place it among the Top R economies
We are secure and safe today because we have a leader who is decisive and bold We are building world class
infrastructure because we have e leader who believes in long term vision We are building an equitable society
because we have a leader who cares. Modi ki Guarantee is for all sectors and all 140 crore citizens
We have embraced our rich heritage and diverse culture Bhavya Ram Mandir in Avodhya has reiuvenated our
society. Our cultural and religious sites are being restored across the country. Our young citizens are finding g
new interest in our history and heritage
Today our voice is being respected on all global platforms because we have a leader who puts Bharat First in all
international affairs. We are trusted. We are attracting global value chains. We are becoming co-creators of
technology.
Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi has been fulfilling our aspirations since 2014. And today ten years later we
once again seek your vote and support to build the Viksit Bharat that we all have dreamed for We seek your
full support to bring a massive majority to BJP and Narendra Modiji.
Vande Mataram
Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
National President BJP
o
e |
T V 0
3

--- Page 6 ---
Sankalp Patra
Note
a
My Dear Brothers and Sisters A
As we stand at the cusp of a transformational era in this country, it is a matter of immense pride and
gratification for me to present to you the Modi Ki Guarantee 2024 Sankalp Patra. We have realised the
importance and significance of this document and the immense responsibility that was placed upon us to
define the Vision of Viksit Bharat It is our hope that this document captures the essence of the aspirations of
the 140 crore Bharatiyas.
The Sankalp Patra has been prepared after elaborate and intensive discussions with people across different
classes A communities and regions. We have made sure that each and every section of the society was heard
and was able to share with us their aspirations. We express our sincere gratitude to each and every Bharatiya
who has given us their suggestions to us through our Viksit Bharat campaign Your suggestions have made this
document immensely richer
This Sankalp Patra is the PM Modi's guarantee that we will work tirelessly to realise your dreams and
aspirations. The nation has witnessed immense progress and development in the last 10 years in this
government under the visionary leadership of PM Shri Narendra Modi. This Sankalp Patra is being presented
before the 140 crore Bharativa at a time when Bharat is taking great leaps across all the sectors ensuring
welfare of all its citizens. It is this delivery that inspires unwavering confidence in every Modi ki Guarantee
among the people of Bharat
When the BJP government came into power in 2014 it faced the daunting task of reviving the stalled
development caused by widespread corruption ineffective governance and indecision during the tenure of
the previous government Under the previous government the nation had plunged into despair due to a lack
of clear intentions weak leadership 0. and a dearth of policies aimed at public welfare. Over the past ten years
we have managedto steer the country away from the troubles inherited from a decade of mismanagement by
the previous government while also accelerating the pace of development
The second term of the NDA government under the leadership of PM Shri Narendra Modi is proof that the
hopes of 140 crore Bharativa have transformed into a solid trust and confidence
would like to appeal to you to join hands with us and support us in the upcoming elections so that our
collective dream of Viksit Bharat is realised
Vande Mataram
Rajnath Singh
|
Chairperson of the Manifesto Committee
(1.A
TY 0
4

--- Page 7 ---
10 DYEARS OF
GOODGOVERNANCE
ANDVIKAS
BHARAT
AUNIQUE
THE LAST10 YEARS PRESENTED MODEL
INCLUSIVE
OF GROWTHTO THE WORLD
GARIB PARIVAR AN
80+ crore citizens are receiving free rations since
2020 through PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana
50+ crore citizens have joined the banking system
through PM Jan Dhan Account
Empowered citizens by transferring 34 lakh crore
directly to their accounts
34+ crore citizens are receiving free health
insurance of 5 lakh under Ayushman Bharat
4+ crore fam ilies now have pucca houses under the
PM Awas Yoiana and other initiatives
14+ crore families have access to clean tap water
under the Jal Jeevan Mission
25 crore citizens have come out of poverty with T
an m
our inclusive approach
NARI SHAKTI
A Lives of 10+ crore women have been transformed due to free gas connections under the
PM Ujjwala Yoiana
4 Empowered Muslim women by protecting them
from the barbaric practice of Triple Talac
11+ crore women are leading dignified lives by using
toilets built under the Swachh Bharat Mission
|
6+ crore mothers and children have been
vaccinated under Mission Indradhanush
Increased paid maternity leave from
12to 26 weeks
5

--- Page 8 ---
Improved health care of women by making sanitary pads available for at 1
3+ crore women availed maternity services under the PM Matru Vandana Yoiana
Empowered women by enacting the Nari Shakti Vandan Adhinivam to provide reservation to
women in Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies
NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE YOUTH
f 46+ crore loans worth 27+ lakh crore have
been given under the PM Mudra Yojana
C 7 IITS, 16 IIITS. 7 IIMS, 15 AIIMS 315 Medical
|
Colleges and 390 universities have been set up.
1.4+ crore young citizens availed skill training
f
under the PM Kaushal Vikas Yoiana
Enabled the creation of the world's
third H-largest startup ecosystem
O Enacted the Public Examinations 1 Prevention of
Unfair Means | Act 2024 to prevent paper leaks
C Supported 280 athletes to excel in the Olympics
and other sporting events under TOPS
KISAN SAMMAN
11+ crore farmers are receiving 76.000 annually
under the PM KISAN
Unprecedented hike in MSP
5x Y increase in the agriculture budget from 2013
to 2024
Livelihood of 4+ crore farmers protected under
the PM Fasal Bima Yoiana
Ensured affordable fertilisers despite huge
increase in global prices by providing subsidies
worth 11 lakh crore
6

--- Page 9 ---
SABKA SAATH SABKA VIKAS
Gave constitutional status to the National Commi ission for Backward Classes ( (NCBC X
About 60% of current Ministers are from OBC SC and ST communities
Three times increase in Eklavya Model Residential Schools since 2014
Instituted 10% reservation for Econom nically Weaker Sections
PM Vishwakarma Yoiana for the holistic welfare and hand I-holding of Vishwakarmas was launched
with an outlay of 13.000 crore
63+ lakh street vendors have received easy credit under PM Svanidhi
2.2+ Lakh beneficiaries from SC. ST communities and women received easy credit of 750.000+ crore
under Stand Up India
Focus on 112 aspirational districts and 500 aspirational blocks to bring them on par
Started PM Janman Yoiana for Particularly Vulnerable Tribal groups with an outlay of 24.000+ crore
Started Vibrant Villages programme to develop 662 border villages with an outlay of 4.800 crore
Established the basic social security framework for unorganised workers by ensuring their
recognition and registration through e-Shram and starting schemes like Atal Pension Yoiana. PM
Shramyogi Maandhan Yoiana and PM Jeevan Jyoti Beema Yoiana
/
A
A
a
20
1
7

--- Page 10 ---
SURAKSHIT BHARAT
Zero maior terror attacks in any city since 2014
Revoked Article 370 leadingto A a significant reduction in violence in Jammu and Kashmir
52% reduction in Left Wing Extremism -related violence
|
71% reduction in insurgency related violence in the Northeast resulted in the removal of the AFSPA
from most areas
We have enacted the Bhartiya Nyay Sanhita which focuses on justice instead of punishments
VIRASAT BHI, VIKAS BHI
( People's dream of 5 centuries of the Ram Mandir in Ayodhya has become reality
a
Renovated Shri Kashi Vishwanath Temple, Shri Uijai in Mahakal Temple and Shri Kedarnath Temple
among others for the revitalisation of ancient traditions
Instituted Janjativa Gaurav Divas on the birth anniversary of Bhagwan Birsa Munda and are setting
up 10 Tribal Freedom Fighter Museums
Installed Netaii Subhash Chandra Bose's statue in the canopy of the India Gate
Construction of a new National War Memorial and new National Police Memorial to honour our
self-sacrificing soldiers and police personnel
a
T
8

--- Page 11 ---
ROBUST ECONOMY AND
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT
T From fragile 5to being of the top 5 economies
one
A Introduced GST, Make in India and Production Linked Incentives | PLI) to promote manufacturing
T Launched the PM Gati Shakti portal for integrated planning of infrastructure
1 Constructing 28 km of national highways day
every
Constructing 14.5 km of railway lines every day, operationalized dedicated freight corridors and
redeveloping 1,300+ railway stations
1 Expanded metro services to 20+ cities
1 Constructed 3.7 lakh km of rural roads in villages under PM Gram Sadak Yoiana
T Eliminated unmanned level railway crossings
1 Doubled the capacity of the ports in the country
Doubled the number of operational airports in India
Introduced Vande Bharat Express . Amrit Bharat Namo Bharat and other new -age trains
Increased the non -fossil fuel energy capacity by 2.5 times to 180 GW
T Achieved 100% electrification by providing electricity connection to 2.8+ crore families under
Saubhagya
1 Unprecedented improvements in connectivity of the Northeast by expansion of roads bridges,
railways and airports
Achieved the fastest 5G rollout in the world with the most affordable data prices
| Cleaned up public procurement through GEM
pA 2
i t
i
a A
a t
Y W
C

--- Page 12 ---
BHARAT ON THE GLOBAL STAGE
Evacuation and safe return of 1.5+ crore citizens in distress situations
Successfully hosted the historic G20 Summit achieving 100% consensus on the New Delhi
Declaration
Bharat becomes Voice of the Global South
Digital India Stack including UPI becomes global
Trading started in INR with 27 partner countries
Leading the development of the India Middle East- Europe Economic Corridor
|
Provided COVID assistance, including 30+ crore COVID-19 vaccines and medicines, to 100 countries
through Vaccine Maitri
Ensuring freedom of navigation and maritime security in the Indian Ocean
Became the first country in the world to land successfully near the South Pole of the moon through
Chandrayaan 3
The UN declared 21st June as the International Day of Yoga at Bharat's initiative
The UN International Year of Millets at Bharat's initiative brought Shree Anna into the global
discourse
10

--- Page 13 ---
A
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
GARIB PARIVAR JAN
We are committed to supporting every garib parivar in comi hing out of poverty and
leading a dignified life. We have undertaken various measures for Garib Kalyan in the
last ten years with good results. We will continue to focus on empowering our garib
parivar jan to improve their quality of life, increase income and live with dignity.
|
Free Ration for the Next 5 Years
We have provided free ration to 80+ crore citizens since 2020. We will continue to provide free ration for
the next five years under PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yoiana
Expanding Our Efforts to Protect Garib ki Thali
We have worked on protecting garib ki thali by establishing a price stabilisation fund for vegetables and
pulses We will expand our efforts to protect the garib ki thali by becoming Atmanirbhar in the
production of pulses, edible oils and vegetables
4 P Continue Providing Free and Quality Health Care
We have provided quality free health treatment of upto 5 lakh to poor families under Ayushman
Bharat We will continue to provide free health treatment by strengthening Ayushman Bharat and other
such initiatives
T
11

--- Page 14 ---
Expanding PM Awas Yoiana
We have improved the living conditions of 4+ crore garib parivar under PM Awas Yojana. We recognise the
far-reaching benefits of this programme We will now further expand the PM Awas Yoiana to ensure
every garib parivar has access to quality housing
Har Ghar Nal se Jal
A
We will ensure clean drinking water. Har Ghar Nal se Jal for all households in villages, towns and cities. We
will extensively use technology to reduce the wastage of water
Slum Redevelopment
We have successfully provided houses to many slum dwellers We will scale it up by making new policies
to construct houses on slum land so low -income families can be rehabilitated into high-quality houses.
Clean Cooking Fuel
Under PM Ujjwala Yojana more than 10 crore beneficiaries have been provided LPG connections. We will
continue this and expand the programme
Zero Electricity Bill
We will provide free electricity to poor households under PM Surya Ghar Muft Biili Yojana.
I 7
2
X
I
12

--- Page 15 ---
tn
EH
F 6
I
-
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR a
MIDDLE-CLASS
PARIVAR JAN
Our middle-class parivar jan are the backbone of our economy / Through their hard
work Y they are contributing a lot to Bharat's economic growth. We are committed to
I
support the aspirations of middle e-class parivar jan providing them opportunities to
|
fulfil their dreams and creating conditions for a better quality of life.
|
N Empowering the Neo Middle Class
|
The last 10 years have seen a o large number of families join the ranks of the neo-middle class due to
steady increase in the incomes of all citizens It is our responsibility to help them grow further while
giving them enough support to stabilise their standard of living. This includes support for affordable
quality housing and healthcare, access to quality education and ample employment opportunities.
Fulfilling the Dream of Owning a Home
We will strengthen the RERA act which has helped make the real estate sector in Bharat more
transparent and citizen friendly than ever before. We will work with the state governments to facilitate
home ownership for middle class parivar jan through comprehensive measures including cost reduction
in construction and registration 1. regulatory reforms like enabling automatic approvals for standard
housing designs S among others
13

--- Page 16 ---
Creating High Value Jobs
O
We will expand Bharat's top-tier startup ecosystem to tier-2 and tier-3 cities. Further | we will transform
Bharat into a global centre for high quality services including tourism to generate high value and diverse
employment opportunities nationwide.
A t
Ensuring Quality Health Care for the Middle Class
We have provided high quality healthcare services to the m iddle class families by expanding the AIIMS
and Ayushman Arogya Mandir network 7 We have provided subsidised medicines through Jan Aushadhi
Kendras and also established 315 new medical colleges across the country I We will continue to expand
these services for our m iddle class families to ensure accessible high quality healthcare services
Promoting Quality Higher Education
We will elevate the quality of education by expanding top educational institutions and upgrading
universities to global standards. We will introduce more IITs S. IIMs S AIIMS and other such institutes. We will
launch internship programmes to blend academic and practical skills
Improving Infrastructure for Ease of Living
We will focus on the modern road network, enhance rail and metro connectivity with new -age trains and
expanded networks, develop comprehensive EV charging stations, construct new airports and advance
our telecom infrastructure with affordable 5G and innovative 6G technology, promoting ease of living for
middle class families
Developing Sustainable Cities
We will develop more green spaces like parks S playgrounds etc., revive water bodies like lakes and ponds
and develop other natural spaces to make cities more adaptable sustainable and people -friendly.
ts
d
14

--- Page 17 ---
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
NARI SHAKTI
Our vision is to create a Viksit Bharat where Nari Shakti is an equal partner and
stakeholder in society's progress. Through a series of legal and policy frameworks 5 we
will ensure the dignity of women and provide them with equal growth opportunities.
Three Crore Lakhpati Didis
We have empowered one crore rural women to become Lakhpati Didis We will now empower three crore
rural women to become Lakhpati Didis
S Ss
Integrating Women SHGS in the Service Sector
We will empower women Self-Help Groups ( SHGS S with the skills and tools in key service sectors like IT.
healthcare. education 1. retail and tourism with an aim to increase their income
Enhancing Market Access for Women SHG Enterprises
We will integrate women Self F. Help Groups (SHGS) with ongoing initiatives such as One District One
Product ( TODOP), Farmer Producer Organizations ( FPOs), Ekta Mall. ONDO GEM One Station One Product
enhancing better market access for their products.
Facilitating Participation of Women in the Workforce
1o
We will ensure development of infrastructure such as working women's hostels, creches etc. with the
specific focus on locations near industrial and commercial centres to facilitate increased participation of
women in the workforce
15

--- Page 18 ---
Increasing Women's Participation in Sports
O
Our women sports persons have brought honours to our country. We will encourage greater
participation of women in sports by launching women sportsperson -focused programmes and facilities
C
Constructing and Maintaining Public Toilets for Women
We have provided dignified lives to women by constructing public and individual toilets under Swachh
Bharat Mission We are further committed to upholding the dignity of women by continuingto construct
and maintain public toilets.
Ensuring Women's Health and Well-Being
We will expand the existing health services focussed on the prevention and reduction of Anaemia, Breast
Cancer Cervical Cancer and Osteoporosis 1 ensuring a healthy life for women We will launch a focussed
initiative to eliminate cervical cancer
3 Implementing the Nari Shakti Vandan Adhinivam
O
We have enacted the long-awaited Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam We will systematically implement this
to ensure representation for women in the Parliament and State Legislatures.
Expanding Shakti Desks
We have established Shakti Desks 1 Women Help Desks) in police stations We will further ensure their
expansion for timely investigation and resolution of issues.
Strengthening Emergency Helpline 112
We will strengthen the Emergency Response Support System and enhance the capabilities of
Emergency Helpline 112
16

--- Page 19 ---
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
YOUNG CITIZENS
Young citizens form an essential pillar of our commitment towards building a Viksit Bharat.
Our vision is to build a Viksit Bharat where young citizens can fully realise their potential. We
will develop an integrated education framework under the NEP I to ensure young citizens
have the opportunity to earn while they learn We guarantee high n-quality education
| |
world-class sports facilities S employment and entrepreneurial opportunities to all young
citizens through the NEP and other programmes
Transparent Government Recruitment
Implementing Law to Prevent Paper Leaks
We have already enacted a strict law to stop misconduct in recruitment exams across the country. We
will strictly implement this law to ensure strict punishment to those playing with the future of our
youth
Conducting Transparent Public Exams
We have set the example for conducting recruitment exams in a transparent manner and recruited lakhs
of youth for government iobs. We will continue to fill the government vacancies in a time bound and
transparent manner We will also extend the central government capacity to states that request
support in conducting recruitment examinations.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Amrit Peedhi
C
O Involving the Youth in Nation Building
We have launched Mera Yuva Bharat ( MY Bharat) to involve the youth in nation building One crore
youth have already enrolled in MY Bharat This will be enhanced to develop leadership skills and spirit of
volunteering by providing equitable access for participation in government initiatives.
Vibrant Startup Ecosystem
8
Expanding the Startup Ecosystem
We have successfully established Bharat among the top 3 Startup Ecosystems through various
interventions ranging from Atal Tinkering Labs, Hackathon 1. Startup India and Start Up India Seed Fund
Scheme We will build upon this success and expand this ecosystem by making Bharat a preferred
destination for startups A supported by robust investment mentorship and a culture that celebrates
entrepreneurial risk-taking We will work with the private sector to expand the incubator network and
link them with higher education institutes to promote entrepreneurship among our students.
O Expand Funding for Startups
A
We will expand the existing Startup India Seed Fund Scheme and Startup Credit Guarantee Scheme to
ensure adequate funds for our start - ups in their entrepreneurial journeys.
OF
Providing Mentorship to Startups
We have successfully provided mentorship under the Atal Innovation M ission where more than 6.000
mentors are already present We will continue establishing tie e- ups with globally recognised mentors sto
support the startups in their journeys to success
Encouraging Startups in Government Procurement
T
We have taken initiatives in many departments including defence and railways to support procurement
from startups. We will prepare a strong framework to further encourage startups in government
procurement
Ensuring Employment Opportunities for Youth
TO A Increasing Employment Opportunities in Manufacturing
o 8
A
With PLI and Make in India programmes 1 manufacturing has emerged as a | maior economic sector with
good success in electronics S defence 1 mobile automobile 2 etc We will continue to work towards making
Bharat a global manufacturing hub and enhance employment in this crucial sector
H
Employment Generation Through Investment in Infrastructure
Unprecedented investment in infrastructure has created a large number of employment opportunities
We will continue this investment for employment growth
O
Establishing Global Centres for High -Value Services
We will further strengthen our efforts to make Bharat the global hub for High -Value Services by
establishing more Global Capability Centres ( GCCs ). Global Tech Centres 1 GTCs 1 and Global Engineering
Centres ( GECS |
Y 01
18

--- Page 21 ---
Promoting the Entrepreneurial Spirit
We recognize the entrepreneurial potential of our youth We will expand credit programmes like Mudra
to support all aspiring entrepreneurs in starting and sustaining their ventures The Mudra loan limit will
be doubled up to 20 lakh and provided to entrepreneurs who have availed and successfully repaid
previous loans under the Tarun category.
Providing New Employment Opportunities in Tourism
Our rich cultural heritage is the centre of global attraction. Our efforts at improving connectivity, building
better infrastructure and reaching out to the world has significantly increased tourist footfall. We will
expand the range of programmes sto further expand the tourism sector and N increase employment
opportunities.
E
a
a
|
19

--- Page 22 ---
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
SENIOR CITIZENS
Joint families are an important factor of our robust social and cultural heritage. Our
society is undergoing a maior change in today's time To cope with these changes S we
|
have initiated a variety of steps S drawing upon our social traditions, to provide a
robust eldercare ecosystem in modern times. We will expand these programmes with
focus on dignified elderly living |
A Ayushman for Senior Citizens
We will expand the Ayushman Bharat Yojana to cover Senior Citizens and provide them access to free
and quality healthcare
/ Facilitating Knowledge Sharing by Senior Citizens
We will introduce a National Senior Citizens portal to honour the wisdom and experience of our elders by
providing them with a platform for sharing their stories. insights and knowledge
O Delivering Government Services Doorstep
at
We will ensure seamless access to social security benefits and other essential government services to
senior citizens by leveraging the extensive reach and reliability of the postal and digital network
DO D0 Digital Empowerment for Senior Citizens
We will provide senior citizens with comprehensive training in using UPI and other online payment
methods, while also educating them on how to recognize and avoid digital scams.
20

--- Page 23 ---
f f Organising Ayush Camps
We will organise regular Ayush camps to provide holistic healthcare solutions rooted in Avurveda Yoga
and other traditional practices to promote active living and vitality of elders.
Ensuring Senior Citizen-Friendly Public Infrastructure
We will implement age -friendly public infrastructure and transportation systems to facilitate mobility
and independence for senior citizens.
AE Facilitate Convenient Teerth Yatra
We will work with state governments to ensure convenient facilities for senior citizens to undertake
sacred pilgrimages across the country.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Mi in
me -
I e
I
I
KIEAWCARD
*
cblS
RTLo
rd
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
* 10
KISAN SAMMAN
RuPay
A A
The dignity and empowerment of farmers is one of our top-most priorities We have
|
empowered our Kisans through a variety of measures including soil health card
|
micro-irrigation I crop insurance seed supply, and direct financial assistance under PM
1
Kisan Samman Yojana We have increased MSP multi-fold A We are committed to
I
support our Kisan families and empower them to lead better lives.
|
Making Agriculture Remunerative
TD Strengthening PM KISAN
We are providing annual financial assistance of 76,000 under PM Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojana. We are
committed to sustained financial support for our farmers
& P Strengthening PM Fasal Bima Yoiana
We will further strengthen the PM Fasal Bi ima Yoiana through more technological interventions to
ensure speedy and more accurate assessment, faster payouts and quicker grievance resolution.
Increase in MSP
We have ensured unprecedented increase in MSP for major crops, and we will continue to increase MSP
from time to time
10
22

--- Page 25 ---
5 Atmanirbhar in Edible Oil
Pulses and
We will support Annadatas to make Bharat Atmanirbhar in the production of pulses (like tur. urad
masoor moong and chana ) and edible oil production (like mustard soybean til and groundnut I
C EAD
New Clusters for Vegetable Production and Storage
-
We will support Annadatas with requisite farm hing inputs to increase the production of nutritious
vegetables by establishing new clusters for the production of essentials like onion. tomato 0. potato etc.
We will also set up storage and logistics facilities at these clusters
Positioning Bharat as the Nutri- Hub of the World
Building on the success of the International Year of Millets 6 we will promote Shree Anna ( Imillets ) for food
security, nutrition and environmental sustainability and make Bharat a Global Millet Hub.
I
Millet as Super Food
We have ensured that Millet gets the global recognition and will now promote it as the global superfood
We will also focus on expanding its cultivation among small farmers A promote research and international
marketing to underscore its health and sustainability advantages.
Strengthening Natural Farming
We will launch the National Mission on Natural Farming to promote nature - friendly, climate o- resilient
remunerative agriculture for food and nutrition secure Bharat
S Further Incentivising Crop Diversification
We have incentivized crop diversification with appropriate price support strategy. Building on this S we
are committed to further expand crop diversification to make agriculture sustainable and remunerative
Ensuring Access to Robust Agri Infrastructure
R Krishi Infrastructure Mission
We will launch a Krishi Infrastructure Mission for integrated planning and coordinated implementation of
agri-infrastructure projects like storage facilities S. irrigation 1 grading and sorting units S cold storage
facilities S. and food processing among others O
Expanding Irrigation Facilities
We have created a 25.5 lakh hectare irrigation capacity under the PM Krishi Sinchai Yojana. Further, we
will launch technology -enabled irrigation initiatives to implement cutting-edge technology for efficient
water management
i Network of Grain Storage Facilities in Rural Areas
We will develop a substantial storage capacity in PACS under the world's largest grain storage scheme in
the cooperative sector We will complement it with basic facilities like grading | sorting | processing and
packing
* Launching Krishi Satellite
We will launch an indigenous Bharat Krishi satellite for farm - related activities like crop forecasting
:
pesticide application 1. irrigation, soil health 1 and weather forecasting | among others
23

--- Page 26 ---
O G Digital Public Infrastructure in Agriculture
We will develop Digital Public Infrastructure to remove information asymmetry in agriculture and
provide farmer-centric solutions and services
Easy Accessibility of Agricultural Inputs
Doubling Custom Hiring Centres
We have already established 25,000 custom hiring centres. We will double the number of custom hiring
centres, focusing on making agricultural machinery and equipment at stable prices.
E Upgrading Krishi Vigyan Kendra
We have upgraded KVKS to provide digital solutions to our farmers. We will further upgrade all Krishi
Vigyan Kendra into a one-stop centre for skill development
Expanding PM Kisan Samriddhi Kendras
We have established PM Kisan Samriddhi Kendras to provide all agricultural inputs and services as
one-stop shops to our farmers We will further expand the network of PM Kisan Samriddhi Kendras.
V
Ensuring High | Yielding Seeds
We will encourage farmers to use high n-yielding, climate resilient and bio-fortified varieties of seeds.
Expanding access to Nano Urea
We have started using nano p-urea to ensure continued soil fertility in Indian farmlands We will further
expand access to and encourage adoption of Nano Urea.
1
24

--- Page 27 ---
Focusing on Allied Sectors
Expand the Network of Dairy Cooperatives
We will expand the network of dairy cooperatives in villages in the next five years with facilities of
fodder banks, milk testing laboratories, bulk milk coolers, and milk processing units.
Protecting Indigenous Breeds
We will make efforts to protect indigenous cattle breeds, and make efforts to increase their productivity
and preserve their genetic diversity.
E Eliminating Major Veterinary Diseases
We will eliminate FMD 1 Foot and Mouth Disease | and will also control brucellosis through a massive |
vaccination campaign.
Sahakar se Samriddhi
We will bring the National Cooperative Policy with a view to make the cooperative movement strong
efficient transparent technically rich and vibrant at the grassroots level
25

--- Page 28 ---
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
FISHERMEN
FAMILIES
We are committed to advancing the prosperity and welfare of our fishermen by
enhancing fisheries through initiatives like the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada
Yojana modernising infrastructure and providing financial support and skill
| 2
development. Our efforts are aimed at empowering fishermen families to thrive and
contribute to the nation's Blue Revolution
Extending PM Matsya Sampada Yojana
We will further extend the PM Matsya Sampada Voiana to increase fish production and increase our
annual seafood exports.
Insurance for Fisheries
We will further strengthen and expand the insurance coverage available under PM Matsya Sampada
Yojana through more technological interventions to ensure speedy and more accurate assessment
faster payouts and quicker grievance resolution
a Developing Production and Processing Clusters for Fishermen
We will develop production and processing clusters with special attention to women of coastal
communities
26

--- Page 29 ---
Seaweed Farming
We will boost seaweed cultivation under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana to increase income
of fishermen
Pearl Farming
We will create sustainable livelihood opportunities for fishermen through promotion of pearl farming
Establishing Nucleus Breeding Centres and Brood Banks
We will increase production and productivity in the fisheries sector through establishment of a network
of Nucleus Breeding Centres and Brood Banks.
BEL
Using Satellite Imagery for Protecting Fishermen
We will launch a special programme utilising satellite imagery for rendering integrated service for the
fishermen community, ensuring both their safety and security
Using Technology to Aid Fishermen
We will make use of a series of technological interventions for farm biosecurity, management of
diseases in aquatic animals, feed and growth monitoring We will make use of drone technology for
management of the fisheries and aquaculture industries.
o1
U
27

--- Page 30 ---
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
SHRAMIK SAMMAN
Our Shramik bandhus are maior contributors to the progress of Bharat We will
.
empower our Shramik Bandhus with the aim to provide the best opportunities and
facilitate ease of working for all workers including gig workers, truck drivers S porters
D
domestic workers, and street vendors, among others A
Periodic Review of National Floor Wages
We will ensure a review of National Floor Wages from time to time
Social Security through Post Offices and Digital India
We have successfully implemented social security insurance schemes like PM Jeevan Bima and Suraksha
Bima for unorganised workers. We will now integrate all such schemes and use the post office and Digital
India network to provide comprehensive social security cover for accident and life insurance. We will use
digital technologies for easy enrollment and seaml less payment
Coverage of workers in e-Shram
We have registered unorganised workers on the e-Shram platform We will reach out to the eShram
registered shramik bandhu and help them avail the benefits of various government programmes that
they are eligible for
Y
|
28

--- Page 31 ---
Onboarding Gig workers on e-Shram
We will work with platforms for registration of Gig workers on eShram and reach out to such shramik
bandhus to help them avail the benefits of various programmes that they are eligible for
A+Q Reaching out to Migrant workers registered e-Shram
on
We will reach out to migrant workers and empower them to avail benefits of various programmes that
they are eligible for
o Special Train Services for Migrant Workers
o
We are running special train services on important occasions for helping the migrant workers travel to
and from their homes We will enhance these services so that migrant workers can travel without any
hassles
8
1. Expanding PM Svanidhi for Street Vendors
(
We have empowered street vendors by providing credit facilities to 63+ lakh street vendors under PM
Svanidhi. We will continue to further expand PM Svanidhi to cover street vendors X travelling salesmen
among others from small towns and villages across Bharat
Establishing Facilities for Drivers along National Highways
9
We will introduce a new scheme for truck drivers under which modern facilities will be developed along
the national highways.
Including Auto, Taxi. Truck and Other Drivers in All Social Security Schemes
We will onboard auto, taxi. truck and other drivers on e-Shram portal and ensure 100% coverage of all
drivers under insurance and other welfare programmes.
a PM SVANidhi
e
T
i
a gurn
o Karnataka
BankLte
29

--- Page 32 ---
a a
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
MSME, SMALL TRADERS
AND VISHWAKARMAS
Small traders and Vishwakarma families have been a backbone of our economy for centuries
We are committed to foster a vibrant, resilient, and innovative environment for MSMES, Small
Traders, and Vishwakarma families that acts as a cornerstone of sustainable economic
growth, empowering communities, and driving inclusive development across the nation.
Providing Easy Working Capital
A
We will use the Digital India infrastructure developed over the last 10 years to create a robust and easy
Digital Credit solution to support the growth of small traders and MSMES.
Strengthening PM Vishwakarma Yoiana
For the first time since independence, we have initiated a specially designed programme for the
upliftment of Vishwakarma families Under this programme we are providing financial assistance 1 credit
facilities, training and skill development and providing market access to Vishwakarma families. We will
further strengthen Bharat's Vishwakarmas through a series of such initiatives.
A I
Simplifying Compliances and Laws
We will reduce compliances for small traders and MSMES to enhance their ease of living and ease of
doing business. We will work with State governments and encourage them to simplify State legislations.
|
30

--- Page 33 ---
Empowering Small Traders and MSMES with ONDO
We will encourage small traders and MSMES to adopt ONDC and expand their businesses using the power
of technology
Protecting against Cyber threats
We will create a suite of public cybersecurity products to help small traders and MSMES protect
themselves against the cyber threats and frauds
Launching Affordable Insurance Products
We will launch affordable insurance products for small traders and MSMES to protect them from
accidents like fire, theft natural disasters etc
TAX L
GST Portal
We will further si implify the GST portal to increase accessibility to users I especially MSMES and small
traders.
2
Transforming Traditional Handicraft
We will modernise traditional crafts by facilitating design interventions by collaborating with design skill
institutes and setting up a Handicraft Design Bank to upskill traditional artisans 6. opening doors to global
market opportunities and transform hing their craft into sustainable livelihood
Expanding Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras
We will expand the network of Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras to provide easy export facility to MSMES A Small
Traders A and Vishwakarma Families
5 O
Khadi As a Global Brand
We will rejuvenate and reposition Khadi as a national and global brand for sustainable lifestyle and
undertake structural reforms to achieve these objectives.
R t Hub
Toy Export
We will transform Bharat into the global hub for toy manufacturing 7 leveraging our skilled workforce and
rich cultural heritage to produce innovative and high n-quality toys.
TY I
- te
31

--- Page 34 ---
F.
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
SABKA SAATH
SABKA VIKAS
Our party has focused on the welfare of the most vulnerable families right from the
beginning. Vanchito ko Variyata and Antyodaya form the core of our philosophy. Sabka
Saath 1. Sabka Vikas drives the policies. We stand committed to improving the lives of all
marginalised sections of the society. Viksit Bharat will be Inclusive Bharat i
Recognising Contributions of Tribal Communities
We instituted the Janjatiya Gaurav Diwas to recognise the huge contribution made by our tribal
communities. We will take this forward by declaring the year 2025 1 (the 150th Birth Anniversary of
Bhagwan Birsa Munda as Janjatiya Gaurav Varsh
A E
Focussed Approach for Tribal Healthcare
We will work towards elimination of malnutrition amongst tribal children and to provide comprehensive
health care and services in m ission mode in tribal areas. We will work towards eliminating sickle cell
anaemia.
Preserving and Promoting Rich Tribal Heritage and Culture
We are committed to honouring and preserving the culture of tribal communities by
Increasing funds to Tribal Research Institutes to promote, preserve 1 and disseminate research
on the rich tapestry of tribal heritage
W
32

--- Page 35 ---
Protect and preserve tribal languages using series of programmes
Continuing our initiative to set up Tribal Freedom Fighter Museums to celebrate the
socio-cultural heritage and contribution of tribal freedom fighters to our freedom movement
Establish a Digital Tribal Arts Academy to promote tribal art forms
i Preserve and promote tribal medicinal traditions
8
8 8 8 Creating a District Level Committee
We will establish a District level committee to ensure that welfare schemes reach the lowest level We
will ensure adequate representation for SC,ST and OBCs in this committee
O
PM-Suraj
We will provide accessible credit facilities to eligible individuals to enable them to access livelihood
opportunities through the PM Surai portal.
(
Unlocking the Potential of Minor Forest Produce
We will encourage innovative and technology -driven startups to initiate commercially viable and
sustainable forest based enterprises and value addition for forest produce We will associate all eligible
-
tribal self-help groups with Vandhan Vikas Kendra I FPOs S NRLM for scaling up the activities relatingto
m inor forest produces and will be provided skill and entrepreneurial training
|
E E Expediting the Establishment of Eklavya Model Residential Schools
We have emphasised the education of tribal children with a target of setting up 740 Eklavya Model
Residential Schools We will expedite the construction and operationalization of the remaining schools.
RR
| Improving Socio-Economic Status of PVTG
We will invest 24,000 crore through PM JANMAN to bring the socio-economic status of the Particularly
Vulnerable Tribal Group on par with society.
Representation of OBC, SC and ST Communities in Governance
8 88
We have 60% current ministers in the Union Council of Ministers from OBC, SC and ST communities. We
have provided constitutional status to the National Commission for Backward Classes. The benefits of all
Garib Kalyan programmes have reached the OBC SC and ST families. We are committed to Sabka Saath
A
Sabka Vikas and adequate participation of all sections in our journey to Viksit Bharat
w
A Expanding Livelihood Opportunities for OBC. Sc & ST families
We will expand livelihood opportunities for all families S including OBC, SC & , ST. by measures like doubling
the MUDRA loan limit to 20 lakh n. We will further expand the successful schemes such as PM Svanidhi
and PM Vishwakaram Yojana I among others. We will further expand employment opportunities through
Eco Tourism and Homestay.
A
Expanding Scholarship Schemes for Students of OBC, Sc &ST Communities
We will ensure that no student of the OBC SC and ST families are deprived of higher education due to
affordability by expanding existing scholarships for meritorious students.
|
EO Expanding Skilling Opportunities for OBC, SC and ST communities
We will further expand skilling opportunities including recognition and certification of prior skills.
KO
P Empowerment of Nomadic Tribes
We have introduced several welfare schemes for nomadic tribes A which have brought a positive change
in their lives We will further expand all these schemes.
Y
33

--- Page 36 ---
Empowerment of Safai Karamcharis
We have started Namaste Yoiana' for Safai Karamcharis which in addition to other welfare schemes
have ensured safety, respect and livelihood for Safai Karamcharis We will continue to expand these
initiatives
Developing Affordable Indigenous Assistive Devices for Divyangs
We will continue developing affordable indigenous aids and assistive devices to make Bharat
atmanirbhar in such equipment
Providing Affordable Housing Priority to Divyangs under the PM Awas Yojana
We will continue to prioritize the housing needs of divyangs under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yoiana 1.
guaranteeing affordable and accessible housing solutions that cater to their unique requirements
b
Expanding the Network of Garima Grahas for Transgenders
We will expand the network of Garima Grahas to cater to the needs of transgender individuals We will
issue identity cards to ensure their recognition nationwide Furthermore all eligible transgender
individuals will be covered under the Ayushman Bharat Yojana.
Leverage Technology for Linguistic Minorities
We will work on creation of a technology -based system such as Bhashini for preservation/ facilitating
translation of languages of linguistic minorities
34

--- Page 37 ---
ON
AMILY
I a I I D
a
U
i
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
VISHWA BANDHU
BHARAT
We have established Bharat as a reliable, trusted and dependable voice globally in the last
ten vears. We have demonstrated Bharat's independence of thought and action for the
benefit of humanity. Our human -centric worldview has helped to be a consensus builder,
first responder and a voice of the Global South. Today, the world believes that Bharat is the
Mother of Democracy. Our diaspora around the world feels empowered and connected. I Our
civilizational values, thoughts S. wisdom and traditional knowledge have found a place of pride
at the world stage. We will strengthen our position and conduct our policies to further our
national interests with the spirit of Vishwa Bandhu |
A | Bharat First Foreign Policy
Leading the Global South
We will further consolidate Bharat's position as a Voice of the Global South by using the Prime Minister's
visionary 5S approach of Samman. Samvad. Sahyog, Shanti and Samriddhi I
First Responder Bharat
f
We will further promote Bharat's reputation as a trusted global partner and a first responder, continuing
our humanitarian assistance and disaster relief programmes
Becoming a Permanent Member of the UN Security Council
We are committed to seeking permanent membership in the UN Security Council to elevate Bharat's
position in global decision making
1
35

--- Page 38 ---
Creating a Global Consensus on Fight Against Terrorism
We will continue our efforts to create a consensus among all members of the United Nations on the
Comprehensive Convention against International Terrorism and other such efforts to combat terrorism.
We will build upon the success of the No Money for Terror' conference to develop better coordination on
countering terrorism financing.
/ Following the Neighbourhood First Policy
We will continue being a trusted and responsible partner in the subcontinent promoting regional
cooperation and ensuring stability and prosperity.
a u A Strengthening Maritime Vision (SAGAR 1
We will continue to collaborate with the countries of the Indo Pacific Region for the security and growth
of all in the Region
F
Establishment of IMEC to promote Bharat's trade interests
We will facilitate the international movement of trade and services through Bharat by boosting
connectivity to Europe via the India Middle East- Europe Corridor
|
Developing Strategic Partnerships for Mineral Security
In our endeavour to secure mineral resources for Bharat, we will work to establish collaborative
partnerships across the globe Through these partnerships we will integrate ourselves in global supply
chai ins 1 and develop mining, processing and related technologies while prioritising sustainable
development practices.
Expanding Bharat's Diplomatic Network
We will further expand the network of our missions and diplomats to pursue the global interests that
have been secured by Bharat's unprecedented rise in the global order
Bharatiya Diaspora for Growth and Development
We will fortify our connection with the Bharatiya diaspora, actively involving them in Bharat's progress
and providing unwavering support during their times of need | thereby enriching our mutual cultural and
economic ties
t
GbnGG
6 B1
%
1
36

--- Page 39 ---
Elevating Bharat as a Global Soft Power
Establishing Thiruvalluvar Cultural Centres Globally
We W will establish Thiruvalluvar Cultural Centres across the globe to showcase Bharat's rich culture and
offer training in yoga 1 ayurveda 1 Bharatiya languages classical music etc We will promote Bharat's rich
democratic traditions going back millennia as the Mother of Democracy
Pioneering International Alliances
We W will continue forming and leading alliances of like mi inded partners in areas of mutual interest such
|
as the International Solar Alliance the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure the One Future
Alliance the Global Biofuels Alliance and the Big Cat Alliance
Taking our Digital Public Infrastructure to the World
The role of Bharat's Digital Public Infrastructure in revolutionising public service delivery is appreciated
all over the world We will work towards sharing this technology with partner countries
7
Taking Yoga and Ayurveda to the World
We W will facilitate Yoga and Ayurveda Institutes in all the major countries for providi ing certified courses.
We W ill also establish a globally recognised certification mechanism for Yoga and Avurveda.
Bringing Back Bharativa Artefacts
555
We will relentlessly work towards bringing back Bharativa idols and artefacts that were taken away
illegally from Bharat
Encourage Classical Language Research
We W will encourage the study of classical Indian languages in major educational institutions across the
world
Celebrating Bharat's Rich Cultural Heritage
Revitalising Bharatiya Civilizational Monuments
i H
We W will collaborate with countries across the globe to restore and revitalise sites of Bharatiya
civilization
A A
Preserving and Promoting the Legacy of Lord Ram
Ramayan is celebrated across the world particularly in South and South A East Asia We will launch a
global outreach program for documenting and promoting the tangible and intangible legacy of Lord Ram
in all countries We will celebrate Ramayan Utsav with great fervour across the globe to commemorate
the Pran Pratishtha of Ram Lalla
a
F
t a
N
1
37

--- Page 40 ---
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
SURAKSHIT BHARAT
In the last ten years S we have taken a firm stand on protecting our country and
citizens from the threats of terrorism and naxalism We have followed a zero tolerance
|
policy on terrorism We remain committed to keep our country and citizens safe
|
A O Continuing a Zero-Tolerance Policy Towards Terrorism
The Surgical Strikes of 2016 and the Air Strikes of 2019 are examples of our dedicated efforts towards
countering terrorism We are committed to defend Bharat's citizens and interests at home and abroad
from all threats of terrorism I
Theatrization of Military Commands
a a 8
We have established the position of Chief of Defense staff 1 CDS) for better coordination in the military
We will further establish the military theatre commands for more efficient operations
Ensuring Robust Infrastructure Along Borders
The gross neglect by previous governments resulted in poor infrastructure in border areas We have
corrected this grave error and started constructing roads, railway, telecom towers, optical fibre cables
and electricity networks. We will accelerate development of robust infrastructure along the Indo China 1.
Indo . Pakistan and Indo Myanmar borders. We will introduce technological solutions on fenced portions
to make fencing smarter.
38

--- Page 41 ---
Reinforcing Our Fight Against Drugs
We will aim towards eliminating the threat of drugs on our society | especially our young citizens through
a series of technical . legal and intelligence programmes. We will work on enforcement and reducing
demand for drugs. We will leverage Big Data analytics artificial intelligence drones and satellite imagery
to detect and dismantle drug trafficking networks effectively.
8
Implementing Bhartiya Nyay Sahita Expeditiously
We have enacted Bharatiya Nyay Sanhita to ensure security as well as justice delivery for our citizens. We
are committed to its effective i implementation through training E online certificate courses new
curriculum in universities and law schools, and many additional measures
Eliminating Left Wing Extremism (LWE 1
We will strengthen our paramilitary forces with state e-of-the-art equipment and trained personnel to
eliminate LWE - in all its forms. Our development measures have weakened the false propaganda spread
by extremists. We will ensure that the development and welfare schemes reach the people living in
areas affected by Left Wing Extremism With this 360 degree approach we will eliminate LW in our
journey | towards Viksit Bharat
a
8 |
Implementation of CAA
M
We have taken the historic step of enacting the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA | and will implement it
to confer citizenship to all eligible persons.
f
Enhancing the Capabilities of the Armed Forces and the Central Armed Police Forces
We will further equip the Armed Forces and the Central Armed Police Forces with modern
state of F-the e-art weapons S equipment and technology to aid the swift disposal of any current and
-
emerging threats
O National Forensics Mission
To move away from 'punishment to justice, and improve the current conviction rate in the country, we
will launch a National Forensics Mission to strengthen the forensic infrastructure 1
rr Protecting Bharat's Security Interests in the Indian Ocean Region
We will expand Bharat's defence footprint across strategic locations and partner with friendly countries
to protect Bharat's and the Indian Ocean Region's security interests
Safeguarding Bharat's Digital Sovereignty
We will take further steps towards strengthening Bharat's digital sovereignty and will take stringent
action against digital entities that threaten the safety of Bharatiya on the internet
O.Lr
I A o Implementing Robust Cyber Security Policies
TL
To regulate and monitor Bharat's cyber protection agencies and infrastructure 2 we will develop and
implement robust cyber security policies
7
A
I
a
1
39

--- Page 42 ---
GIMIE F
a O
s bls
s an 5
a I
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
PROSPEROUS
BHARAT
We have successfully brought Bharat from fragile 5 . to top 5 economies despite the global turmoil
and once -in n-a-century event Covid pandemic :. We have strengthened our financial system
,
maintained fiscal prudence, and increased our foreign exchange reserves. We have successfully
shielded our citizens from global price shocks and created a conducive environment for economic
growth. Our policies have resulted in Bharat becoming the 5th largest economy. We will build upon
this foundation in the next five years to launch our country on the path to Viksit Bharat by 2047
E
Make Bharat the Third - Largest Economy
Within a decade, we have brought Bharat from 11th to 5th largest economic power. This was possible due
to right policies, focussed execution and meticulous planning We guarantee that Bharat will be the 3rd
largest economic power
Sustaining Financial Macro Stability
We have demonstrated low inflation 1 high growth and fiscal prudence in the past decade We will
continue on this path and stay committed to expand our economic prowess.
Expanding Employment Opportunities
Despite global challenges and unprecedented events such as the Covid pandemic, our economic policies
have been successful in creating a substantial number of employment opportunities. Our strategic focus
on sectors like manufacturing services, rural industry, infrastructure, tourism 1 and skill development,
coupled with support through credit facilities via Svanidhi and Mudra, has greatly expanded livelihood
V 1
40

--- Page 43 ---
prospects We are committed to increase employment self-employment and the enhancement of
livelihood opportunities for our citizens
Developing Bharat as a Trusted Global Value Chain Partner
Our policies such as Make in India and PLI have significantly increased manufacturing activities. We
recognise that manufacturing presents huge potential for employment creation. We will make Bharat a
trusted Global Manufacturing Hub through a series of programmes including simplification of regulatory
processes, investment in infrastructure to meet the requirements of manufacturing hubs, bringing
capital to the industry and investing in research and development
Increasing the Exports
We will promote Bharat's exports through international cooperation I infrastructure development and
simplification of laws
TA Revamp Commercial and Tax Legislations
We have substantially simplified the indirect and direct tax systems through simpler rules, new
legislation . and use of technology. We are committed to launch an exercise to completely revamp our
economic and commercial legislations sto suit our economic needs.
TA
Honour Honest Taxpavers
We will honour honest taxpayers who have played an important role in strengthening our economy
RIHdRaas
a
forar
IT T D
a T I
THI GHOR EDAR
E RVAN
I
-
f
41

--- Page 44 ---
T
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
GLOBAL
MANUFACTURING
HUB
In the last ten years we have made significant progress in the manufacturing sector I We launched
a series of programmes like Make in India, PLI, and simplification of compliances to expand
manufacturing We will further harness the potential of manufacturing in creating employment
opportunities and expanding economic activity. We believe that our talent in research and design
can be best complimented by expanding the manufacturing sector. We also understand the need
for self-reliance and resilience in global value chains. Therefore, we will make all efforts to develop
Bharat as a Global Manufacturing Hub
Global Manufacturing Hub
Under the Make in India programme, manufacturing has emerged as a maior economic sector with good
success in electronics. defence, mobile, automobiles and more We will work towards making Bharat a
global manufacturing hub and enhance employment in these crucial sectors
Becoming Product Nation
We are a maior engineering and design services hub in the world with many complex products being
designed in Bharat We will build on this strength to become a maior Product Nation by combining our
strength in product design services with manufacturing
Developing Robust Industrial Infrastructure
Cnnn
Based on the principles of PM-Gatishakti, the government shall develop industrial cities in different
industrial corridors for balanced regional development This shall promote industrialisation of backward
regions of the country.
|
42

--- Page 45 ---
Balanced and Inclusive Development
We will launch an initiative to foster balanced regional development across all districts of the country
Brand | promotion and exports of One District One Product ( (ODOP | products will be encouraged under
the initiative
be Building Globally Competitive Food Processing Industry
a
We will establish smart food processing hubs equipped with cutting-edge technologies to
enable comprehensive monitoring of the entire food supply chain I from farm to table ensuring
quality, traceability and operational efficiency
We will position Bharat as a maior player in value chains of processed fruits, vegetables fish 1.
seafood and dairy, among others
me A
Focusing on Core Industries
We will focus on the technology and sustainability transition happening in steel. cement metals and
engineering goods industries We will support these industries to adopt greener manufacturing
processes
T
Promoting Defence Manufacturing
We will vastly expand domestic defence manufacturing and exports of Made in Bharat defence
equipment This effort will be facilitated by accelerating indigenisation in maior Air and Land Equipment
Platforms
NT Positioning Bharat as a Global Railway Manufacturing Hub
We will promote manufacturing 7 research and development in the railway sector to make Bharat a
|
leading global railway manufacturing hub
A Making Bharat as Global Aviation Manufacturing and MRO Hub
Toe
We will bring a commercial aircraft manufacturing ecosystem to Bharat. For this we will design
a Policy for Aerospace Manufacturing in the country and try to develop our own passenger
aircraft
We will strengthen the civil aviation ecosystem by encouraging Maintenance 2 Repairs and
Overhaul ( MRO I activities as well as Aircraft Financing and Leasing Activities institutions
through comprehensive government support programs under the Make in India initiative
A Promoting Ship Building
We will ensure availability of dedicated research designing and testing facilities across the countryto
promote shipbuilding under the Make in India initiative
O
Strengthening Bharat's Position as Pharmacy of the World
We will strengthen Bharat's position as the Pharmacy of the World' by boosting the
manufacturing and research capacities of the pharmaceutical sector especially APIS
We will expand Research Linked Incentive schemes I encouraging companies to invest in
research for new drugs 6 chemical entities and new biological entities.
P a HE Making Bharat Global Electronics Manufacturing Hub by 2030
a
M
o In the last ten years we have established a USD 100+ billion electronics manufacturing
industry. We have already become the second largest mobile phone manufacturer in the world
Our policies have resulted in generating huge employment opportunities in this industry.
Y
43

--- Page 46 ---
i I We will consolidate our efforts and expand electronics manufacturing three times to become a
maior player in the global value chain We will leverage our design capabilities to develop
indigenous brands.
r Making Bharat Maior Player in Semiconductor and Chip Manufacturing
a
Building on our success of electronics industry, will deepen our component ecosystem and take
semiconductor design and manufacturing to a new level to become one of the global maiors in chip
manufacturing
EV Making Bharat a Global Leader in Automobile and EV Manufacturing
Bharat is a maior automobile manufacturer We will support the growth of the automobile industry and
its transition to EV manufacturing F We will invest in establishing a nationwide EV charger infrastructure
to encourage EV adoption
7 Developing Rare Earths and Strategic Mineral Industry
We will support exploration for rare earths and strategic minerals. We will develop partnerships with
countries having reserves of these minerals to secure our supply chain. We will support the processing
industries and manufacture of final products using rare earths and strategic minerals.
BE
Making Bharat a Global Leader in Textile Manufacturing
i a Bharat has been a leader in textiles S. garments and apparels. We recognise the huge
|
employment generating potential of these industries. Therefore, we will accelerate the efforts
made over the last ten years and take textile 2 garment and apparel industries to the next
level
i We will successfully operationalize PM Mitra parks A invest in research and development of new
products, simplify the legal and compliance regimes I invest in common amenities A invest in
infrastructure for textile industry, and launch special skilling programmes focussed on
employment
i i We will also make investments in our traditional textile industries to take our indigenous
industries and designs to the global stage
Lab Grown Diamonds
We will make India the largest producer for lab-grown diamond production, embracing
cutting-edge technology and sustainable methods to drive economic growth and establish n
leading position in the international market
Setting Up Bio = Manufacturing Hubs
For fostering high-performance biomanufacturing towards promoting a circular economy for green
clean and prosperous Bharat by setting up of Bio = Manufacturing Hubs.
Y
te
H
te
it h
t
44

--- Page 47 ---
1 T I
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
WORLD-CLASS
INFRASTRUCTURE
We have transformed infrastructure in the past ten years in terms of quality, quantity and reach.
Every region of the country is experiencing the benefits of our efforts. We will continue these efforts
so that our citizens can realise their full potential in life and livelihood I
Providing Best in Class Experience in Railways
Constructing New Tracks
We will expand the railway network to increase capacity for passenger as well as cargo transportation.
We have constructed 31,000 km railway tracks 2 in the last ten years. We are now adding 5000+ km of new
tracks every year and will continue to add new tracks at this pace for the next few vears.
Increasing Ticket Availability
We will significantly increase passenger carrying capacity by 2030 to significantly reduce the waiting list
Expansion of Kavach Train Protection System
We have indigenously developed Automatic Trai in Protection System Kavach and are rapidly expanding
its coverage. In the next few years, we will expand the manufacturing, design and installation of Kavach
Systems in a mission mode just as we electrified the railway network
45

--- Page 48 ---
Building World Class Station
We have already started redevelopment of 1.300+ railway stations to world class standards. We will
expand this project to all other major and medium sized stations.
a Expanding Coverage of New Age Trains
a C
o 1
We have developed and manufactured world class Vande Bharat Amrit Bharat and Namo Bharat trains
We will further expand this network of new age trains
A
7 FR Vande Sleeper Trains
We will launch Vande Sleeper trains for r comfortable overnight journey
High Frequency Trains for Regional Connectivity
We have commissioned sections of RRTS between Del Ihi and Meerut We will further expand these
services and launch other regional connectivity programmes sto other major cities to ensure robust
connectivity and integrate the regional economi ies.
a
Expanding Metro Network
We have initiated metro in 20+ cities over the past decade we will expand the metro network in major
urban centres ensuring last mile connectivity
n Expanding Bullet Trains
We are constructing the first Bullet Train corridor in the country. Using the experience gained so far we
will initiate feasibility studies for Bullet Trai in Corridors in North South and East India
B R Launch User Friendly Super App
RR
We will launch a Super App to provide all trains related services to users in a single app.
a
46

--- Page 49 ---
World | Class Road Network
O
r Expanding PM Gram Sadak Yojana
We will extend the PM Gram Sadak Yoiana to the remotest areas where there are settlements to ensure
improved connectivity and access to healthcare, education 1. government services and markets.
A | Further Enhancing Road Safety
We will focus on further improving safety on roads through a series of techno legal interventions S.
training and behavioural change to improve road safety 7
Expanding Expressways and ring roads
We will strengthen the modern road connectivity ecosystem to 15.000 km of access-controlled
highways. We will construct ring roads around major cities to improve mobility and decongest cities.
4
Promoting EVs
We have successfully facilitated the induction of over 30 lakh EVs, currently operational on our roads. We
will increase the fleets of EVs and will also establish EV charging stations.
I
T
T
E
E
T
I
a
A I
O =
2
1.
47

--- Page 50 ---
Strengthening Aviation Sector
Developing Airports for Seamless Connectivity
We will enhance ai ir connectivity multifold by development and operationalization of new airports
helipads and aerodromes
f Ensuring the Modernisation of Airports
We will transform airports into multi-modal hubs with integrated transit facilities such as buses G metro
and rapid rail among others by effective use of PM Gatishakti National Master Plan
A
a o Expansion of International Airports
o
In line with our vision for enhanced connectivity and economic growth we will expand the number of
international airports
A Formulating Master Plan for Airport Transformation
a
A a
We will introduce the Amrit Kaal Civil Aviation Master Plan to transform our airports into regional
international hubs . providing single point connectivity to designated regions worldwide 2 with the vision
-
to position Bharat as the leading aviation ecosystem of South Asia.
Strengthening Waterways and Shipping
0 A Enhancing the Capacity of Inland Waterways
We will integrate inter -ministry initiatives like the National Waterway Proiect. Namami Gange 1 the
National River Conservation Plan 1 Jal Marg Vikas Project and Arth Ganga among others, to double the
share of Inland Water Transport in transportation
E a Expanding Water Metro
We will expand water metro services across all feasible regions . enhancing water -based public
transportation networks and improving connectivity
1
E Building Homegrown Shipping Industry
a
We will revamp the legal framework to enable faster growth of our Shipping industry to become globally
competitive
Digital t Infrastructure
Facilitating Digital Revolution by 6G
We will expand the 5G networks and take the lead in the development of 6G technology.
V ? A I Expanding
Bharat Net
|
We have connected over 2 lakh Gram Panchayats with BharatNet. We will expand BharatNet to every
village with broadband making high -speed internet accessible to all.
B Land Records Digitization
7
We will implement next generation Land Record Digitization' and the integration of various institutions
like Revenue Courts and Registration Offices.
W
48

--- Page 51 ---
Energy Security
% A
Ensuring Energy Independence by 2047
We will achieve energy independence for Bharat by 2047 and reduce petroleum imports through a mix of
electric mobility, network of charging stations I renewable energy production and improving energy
efficiency
O
Implementing PM Surya Ghar Muft Biili Yojana
|
We will enable homes across Bharat to run devices like Electric Stoves 1 Fan, AC TV among others and also
enable EV charging through solar energy.
SE
Increasing Ethanol Mix for Dual Benefits
Ethano
We have achieved record ethanol blending under the Ethanol Blended Petrol Programme We will further
increase ethanol blending in petrol to mitigate environmental degradation while providing additional
income to farmers.
Se F
A Expanding Nuclear Energy
We will expand the nuclear energy component of Bharat's energy mix through a focus on developing
small modular reactors as well as increased investment in nuclear energy production
-C
Accelerating Bharat's Renewable Energy Transition
We will harness Bharat's renewable energy potential . targeting 500 GW of renewable energy through
the establishment of mega solar parks, wind parks and the Green Energy Corridor project among others
DO
o Developing Battery Energy Storage System Infrastructure
T
We will incentivise private sector investment in large -scale Battery Energy Storage Systems 1 BESS
infrastructure for fostering renewable energy integration 1. grid stability and resilience ensuring a
sustainable and reliable energy future for all.
E A Increasing Green Hydrogen Production Capacity
I
With a clear focus on green hydrogen, we will invest in expanding production 1. developing technologies
and aim to become a maior green hydrogen production hub
Establishing Smart Grid
We will establish nationwi ide smart grids integrated with advanced technology, including smart meters
and control centres, for efficient and intelligent energy management
O C
Global Manufacturing Hub in Renewable Energy
3
We will set up a Centre of Excellence for clean energy technologies and position the country as Global
Manufacturing Hub for Wind | Solar and Green Hydrogen and scale up Bio Energy Manufacturing facilities
from all sorts of waste
a
O0
R a
TY
49

--- Page 52 ---
M
9 o IT
A-87/27 T o aOR Pa
une I . H
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
EASE OF LIVING IN
CITIES
Our vision is to provide a world -class infrastructure in all cities and promote sustainable living |
Promoting Affordable Housing
We will strengthen the RERA act which has helped make the real estate sector n in Bharat more
transparent and citizen friendly than ever before Further, we will facilitate home ownership for
middle -income families through comprehensive measures including cost reduction in construction and
registration, regulatory reforms like enabling automatic approvals for standard housing designs and
promoting mixed- use housing.
8 New Satellite Townships
We will encourage the creation of new satellite townships near metro cities across India through a
combination of reforms and policy initiatives. We will encourage mixed use and transit oriented
development through the same
Expanding Piped Natural Gas Connections
O
We have provided piped gas connections to around 11 crore households nationwide We will further
expand this programme to all major cities and towns
250
o Ensuring Ease of Mobility
We will create unified metropolitan transport systems that integrate multi-modal transport facilities
and reduce commute time in cities. We will implement Al technologies for traffic management and
transport efficiency
50

--- Page 53 ---
Expanding Fleet of PM-eBus
| -
D
We have launched a scheme PM-eBus Seva to introduce a fleet of e- Buss across cities to provide
affordable and safe transport to citizens. Now we will further extend it to other eligible cities.
Developing Water-Secure Cities
We will create water -secure cities | leveraging best practices for wastewater treatment aquifer recharge
and smart metering for bulk consumers
&
Promoting Cooperative Urban Governance
We will begin long-term infrastructure projects with centre-state-city partnerships with a vision to
revitalise our urban landscapes and enhance the quality of life for our citizens.
n A E Developing Sustainable Cities
We will develop more green spaces like parks S. playgrounds etc.. reviving water bodies and developing
natural spaces to make cities more adaptable sustainable and people e-friendly
9 Open Landfill Free Cities
We will continue eliminating open landfills to manage all kinds of waste being produced in Bharat
through Waste to Wealth Mission '
Strengthening the Urban Land Record Systems
We will undertake the creation of the Digital Urban Land Records System
= ATA Encouraging Modern Regulatory Framework
We will work with state governments and cities to encourage them to create a modern set of legislation
1
by-laws and urban planning processes using technology
CO9 Global Conference and Exhibition Hubs
We will create big convention centres across cities and make Bharat into a global destination for
conferences and exhibitions
a
E An Urban Governance Curriculum
To ensure all round development of cities I we will create a fresh curriculum to teach urban finance 2. urban
infrastructure 1 urban environmental protection 1. urban water management urban transport and more.
* WITCH
DE
a
51

--- Page 54 ---
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
VIRASAT BHI,
VIKAS BHI
Our vision of Virasat bhi, Vikas bhi is to shape a future where our traditions inspire and
>
unite people across the world
|
Developing Our Religious and Cultural Sites
0 |
We will undertake significant new projects to develop religious and tourist sites inspired by the Kashi
Vishwanath corridor model, across the length and breadth of our country.
Holistic Development of Ayodhya
As millions of devotees from around the world visit Shri Ram Lalla in Ayodhya, we are committed to the
holistic development of the city.
Continue the Preservation and Study of Bharatiya Manuscripts
We will continue to digitise all Bharatiya manuscripts and epigraphs in mission mode We will establish na
dedicated scholarship programme to research ancient Bharativa manuscripts and epigraphs
b Establishing Bharativa Sanskriti Kosh
We will establish the Bharativa Sanskriti Kosh to ensure the preservation and protection of ancient
Bharativa civilization 1. classical languages, culture. and traditions through the extensive use of
technology.
52

--- Page 55 ---
Expediting the establishment of U pi a (Yuge Yugeen I Bharat National Museum
R o |
We will expedite the construction of the Yuge Yugeen Bharat National Museur featuring millenia of
Bharativa history and work towards making it one of the most liked museums in the world
A
Developing Legal Standards For Cultural IP Protection
We will collaborate with domestic and international organizations like WIPO & UNESCO to develop
harmonised legal standards for cultural IP protection.
Translating Bharativa Literary Works into Foreign Languages
We will support the translation and adaptation of ancient Bhartiva literary works into foreign languages
I
C International Conclave on Bharatiya Knowledge Traditions
We will organise a Triennial International Conclave on Bharativa Knowledge Traditions.
Ta Developing ASI Monuments
We will restore and preserve culturally important Archaeological Survey of India Monuments S. re-igniting
our rich heritage for the 21st century.
Strengthen Swadesh Darshan Programme
O O
We have launched a Swadesh Darshan programme for comprehensive development of tourist
destinations. We will work with state governments to implement and further strengthen this
programme We will include destinations and circuits covering the life and travels of important saints
and philosophers
Q Developing Thematic Circuits for promoting cultural experience
O
For Border Villages to experience their lifestyle and culture
Sustainable ecotourism in select under-explored regions spread across Bharat
Riverine Tourism along all maior river ecosystems of Bharat
i i Island tourism hubs in Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Adventure Tourism in the North East and other Hill States.
D /
Promoting Wed In India
We will promote select destinations across Bharat as preferred venues to showcase the richness of
Bharativa weddings I highlighting the vibrant traditions . and supporting cultural exchanges.
a 7
a
i t
a
it
53

--- Page 56 ---
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
GOOD GOVERNANCE
'Reform Perform I Transform' is our mantra for Good Governance We have used a mix of
| |
policies, technology, and simpler processes to ensure good governance in the last ten years.
These initiatives have made the governance more efficient and have reduced corruption at all
levels of governance from the top to everyday transactions carried out by citizens. Our Vision
for good governance is to further simplify the processes procedures | rules and regulations in
|
such a way that we are able to take the government out of the everyday lives of normal
citizens. We will undertake institutional reforms and simplify using
more processes
technology to ensure that citizen-government interaction is significantly improved |
Institutional Reforms
Combating Corruption
In contrast with the previous government, we have given transparent and accountable governance to
our citizens. We will continue our fight against corruption through strict implementation of laws and use
of technology.
Bringing Uniform Civil Code
Article 44 of the Constitution lists Uniform Civil Code as one of the Directive Principles of State Policy
BJP believes that there cannot be gender equality till such time Bharat adopts a Uniform Civil Code
which protects the rights of all women. and the BJP reiterates its stand to draw a Uniform Civil Code,
drawing upon the best traditions and harmonising them with the modern times.
1
54

--- Page 57 ---
:
Fiscal Autonomy of Panchayati Raj Institutions
We will take further steps to facilitate fiscal autonomy and sustainability of Panchayati Rai Institutions
2
Formulating a National Litigation Policy
We will formulate a National Litigation Policy to expedite the resolution of all matters in courts A lower
the cost of contested court proceedings, and decrease the number of cases in which the government is
a party and the consequent load on the courts
Initiating Reforms in the Civil Procedures
c
We will completely overhaul the commercial and civil justice systems 1 on the lines of criminal justice
reforms. This revamp will ai im to streamline procedures 1 enhance the efficiency of legal processes and
ensure timely justice fostering a more business -friendly and citizen -centric legal environment
0 Improving Delivery of Public Services
We will improve public services delivery through CSCs and Post Offices using technology. We will use
Bhashini to provide services in multiple Indian languages. We will increase participation of citizens in
policy making through platforms like MyGov
5
Strengthen Statistical Institutions
L
We will further strengthen the capacity of statistical institutions to give an impetus to data driven policy
making
Electoral Reforms
& Making Nation Election Reality
One 1. One a
We have set up oa High Powered Committee to examine the issues of conducting simultaneous elections
and will work towards the implementation i of the recommendations of the Committee
Introducing Common Electoral Roll
We will make provisions for a common Electoral Roll for all levels of el lections.
Employees and Police Personnel Welfare
P
Capacity Building for All Central Government Employees
We will expand the Karmyogi Scheme to cover al II Central Government employees A promoting a
responsive highly competent and tech h-savvy workforce for efficient and inclusive governance
a
Modernising Police Forces
I e
We will assist states in transforming the police into a tech n-savvy, tech n-trained and tech n-equipped force
through the Police Modernization Scheme
55

--- Page 58 ---
Judicial Reforms
A Accelerating e-Courts Mission Mode
on
We will accel lerate the e-Courts Mi ission Mode Proi siect to complete the digitisation of entire court records
and for easy access to court proceedings online
Expedite the Resolution of Old Cases
We will establish fast track courts for quick disposal of pendency in identified areas
Creation of Ecosystem for Alternate Dispute Resolution
We will work towards further improving the legal framework to promote arbitration and mediation
ecosystem
a
A
1
56

--- Page 59 ---
I
CIP STATIO
400
CLEANED
BIOZEFN
B311 020 000
EO.ID
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
SWASTHA BHARAT
We have taken many successful steps in the last ten years to expand and improve health
services. We have focused on yoga 1 fitness S. clean air, pure water and nutritious food for the
overall well being of our citizens We developed vaccines to fight the pandemic. The Ministry
|
of AYUSH was created to promote traditional medicine. Opened new medical colleges to
increase the number of doctors. Medical care was provided to every person through AIIMS
and Ayushman Arogya Mandir. Free medical treatment up to Rs 5 lakh provided by Ayushman
Bharat. And used technology extensively in every field. Modi's guarantee is to further
increase these efforts for a healthy India
|
Strengthening AIIMS
We have established 15 AIIMS in the past decade to provide affordable and quality healthcare for all. We
will strengthen our network of AIIMS to provide quality healthcare across the country.
C Increasing Seats In Medical Education
Through the increased number of AIIMS and various medical colleges, we will increase the number of UG
and PG seats in medical education.
A Dy
Strengthening PM ABHIM
We are already upgrading secondary and primary health care under PM-ABHIM PM-Ayushman Bharat
Health Infrastructure Mission). We will further expand PM-ABHIM for robust health care
M 1
57

--- Page 60 ---
TO
Strengthening Avushman Arogya Mandirs
We will further strengthen the Ayushman Arogya Mandirs and upgrade district hospitals and other
secondary healthcare centres by expanding the full functionality of all packages for comprehensive
healthcare
A Expanding Jan Aushadhi Kendras For Affordable Medicines
We will expand the Jan Aushadhi Kendra network to provide high-quality low- -cost medicines to citizens
across the country
F Launching Emergency And Trauma Care Mission
an
We will launch an Emergency And Trauma Care Mi ission to provide immediate and effective care to
trauma patients.
a
O Strengthening The Ongoing Programmes For Disease Eradication
We will intensify existing efforts to ensure elimi ination of TB Leprosy, Lymphatic Filariasis S. Measles and
|
Rubella, Trachoma, and Kala Azar by facilitating timely testing and access to medicines.
Accelerating Vaccine Production and Distribution
A E
We will encourage and extend support to Bharatiya vaccine manufacturers and biopharma companies in
various capacities to boost production and distribution and aim to reduce our timeline for vaccine
manufacturing
Augmenting the Health Human Resources
We will strengthen the efforts being made to increase the training capacity for paramedics I technicians
pharmacists and nurses
Improving Mental Healthcare Services
In our increasingly complex society, mental well-bei ing has emerged as a top priority. We will strengthen
our traditional means including Yoga and Meditation 1 and also enhance the scope and coverage of mental
health initiatives like Manas and Manodarpan
1 Rd
1
P Y
t *
t
zreta
h TR
arfrazu RM a
*
T 1
a R UE H
SOLANKI PRAKASHBHAI PM-JAY
BALABHAI Y
58

--- Page 61 ---
Y
MODI
K |
GUARANTEE FOR
QUALITY
EDUCATION
Our vision is to redefine the education ecosystem by envisioning modern universalised 1 quality
|
education propelled by the momentum of NEP 2020. We will prepare our students to be future ready
through a dynamic curriculum process. We will encourage teaching and learning in mother tongue
We will focus on all dimensions of quality education including teachers training, infrastructure e. use of
technology, internships, and time -to-time upgradation of knowledge and skills.
Establishing New Institutions of Higher Learning
7 IITs, 16 IIITs I 7 IIMS, 15 AIIMS, 315 Medical Colleges and 390 universities have been set c-up in the past
decade We are committed to strengthening these institutes and further increasing the number of
institutions of higher learning We will continue to upgrade the existing institutions through focused
funding 7 capacity building E infrastructure upgradation and dedicated research grants
Using Technology for Access to Quality Education
p We will promote the usage of education stack for personalised and flexible learning
management systems through initiatives under PM e-Vidya such as SWAYAM SWAYAM PRABHA
|
etc
Building on the success of the above digital learning initiatives. we will operationalize a digital
university for industry v-focused free courses to provide upskilling opportunities for low-income
families
|
59

--- Page 62 ---
Ensuring Quality School Education
We will ensure that every student gets the opportunity for high-quality school education For this S. we
will strengthen the network of PM SHRI Schools S. Ekalavya Schools and other such schools as per NEP to
make them world-class We will work towards a 100% Gross Enrollment Ratio from pre-school to
secondary level
O o Ensuring
Z Future- Ready Youth
We will make our youth future ready by adopting a dynamic learning curriculum at school level as
mandated by NEP and by incorporating industry-aligned curriculum and skill development in emerging
technologies in higher education
a = Implementing One Nation One Student ID
1
We will achieve 100% implementation of 'One Nation 1. One Student ID through the Automated
Permanent Academic Account Registry ( APAAR 1 to store academic qualifications, credit scores and
certificates . among others for students from pre -primary to higher education
8 Expanding Skills Training for Youth
P 8
In the last ten years S we have developed a robust skill development ecosystem In line with the
objectives of NEP. we will further enhance it and integrate it with our education system We will
continue to work with industryto expand skilling opportunities that lead to employment and
self-employment
Y
60

--- Page 63 ---
TUM
UL W
-
nu
is
iy
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
SPORTS
DEVELOPMENT
Our vision is to strengthen the sports ecosystem for Bharat to be a world leader in
Sports
|
Facilitating Hosting Olympics
We will facilitate IOA to bid for hosting the
Olympic Games in 2036, and develop sports
infrastructure like stadiums and
state-of-the-art training centres to host maior
international sporting events.
Providing Comprehensive Plan for
Retired Sportspersons
We will launch a new programme for
sportspersons, providing them with benefits like
educational opportunities employment
opportunities and promotion opportunities.
T
61

--- Page 64 ---
R
Including More Traditional Sports Under Khelo India
We will include more traditional sports under the Khelo India Scheme
Incentivising Sports Good Manufacturing
We will incentivize sports goods manufacturing in partnership with the sports ecosystem in Bharat to
take forward the vision of Aatmanirbhar Bharat
Universal Access to Sports Infrastructure
We will continue to expand the Khelo India network and other initiatives to nurture future athletes who
can represent our nation with pride
Promote Sports Startups
We will promote startups in sports and help create a technology ecosystem in sports
A
5
I
i
a I
62

--- Page 65 ---
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
BALANCED REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
Our vision for regional development is to ensure every part of India progresses equally, fostering
growth and innovation
E Maintaining in Northeast
Peace
We will continue our efforts to address the issues C in the disturbed areas and remove AFSPA in a phased
manner We will further work towards resolution of inter-state border disputes amongst Northeastern
states through sustained efforts.
Leveraging Northeast as a Strategic Gateway for the Act East Policy
We will work to leverage the Northeast as a strategic gateway for Bharat's Act East Policy ensuring
connectivity, education. health 1 economic development and security.
*
Building Sarovars to Manage Floods in North East
We will ensure flood management in the Northeast by conducting advanced satellite imageryto identify
places where big reservoirs can be constructed to store excess waters according to topography, which
will be used for irrigation 1. organising water sports among others
Formulating Master Plan For Purvodaya
We will formulate a dedicated Purvodaya Master Plan for targeted and integrated infrastructure
development of eastern India.
63

--- Page 66 ---
Holistic Development of Islands
We will transform our islands into premier global tourism destinations by developing world-class beach
resorts S. marine adventure activities X and robust coastal infrastructure Our focus will be on attracting
tourists from Bharat and around the world while preserving the local ecosystems and promoting
sustainable tourism practices
: O
00 Sustainable Development of Hill States
a
We will continue to protect and preserve the unique ecological balance of Bharat's hill states through
sustainable development initiatives. We will work with state governments and local bodies to prepare a
special master plan to maintain their pristine beauty and biodiversity, taking into account the local
geography, culture and traditional practices, for the balanced development of hilly areas.
: P Resilient Infrastructure Bharat's Coast
For
We will continue to strengthen Bharat's coastline by developing a resilient infrastructure We will work
with the state governments and local communities to prepare a master plan, keeping in mind the special
needs of coastal areas and ensuring all facilities
A
L Combating Himalayan River Floods
We will partner with neighbouring countries to strategically manage the Himalayan rivers. Our focus will
be on holistic measures to mitigate the devastating effects of floods and harnessing hydroelectric
power to generate affordable electricity.
a the a
a
64

--- Page 67 ---
ING SIMULATOR
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
TECHNOLOGY AND
INNOVATIONS
Y+
Our vision is for Bharat to be a champion in technological innovations by becoming the
centre of cutting-edge research
.
C
A Positioning Bharat as Leading Space Power
A
We will launch Gaganyaan I Bharat's first human spaceflight mission, and land an astronaut on
the Moon a sign of Bharat's progress and prosperity in Amrit Kaal |
1
i We will establish Bharatiya Antariksha Station BAS A and we will also operationalise a second
launch complex for the country.
We aim to significantly increase the value of the Space Economy, positioning Bharat as a
leading space power and extending support to Global South countries in utilising space and
space technology services.
a We will set up a Global Space Academy under the aegis of ISRO and IIST with fellowship
programmes for both national and international students We will also establish a spaceforum
that positions Bharat as a leading space power and assist Global South countries in using
space and space -tech services
Operationalising Anusandhan National Research Foundation
We will operationalise the Anusandhan National Research Foundation to build robust Research and
Development infrastructure across the country
65

--- Page 68 ---
* Scientific Research Fund
We will set up an Anusandhan Fund with an investment of 1 lakh crore to provide loans to promote
scientific research
a .
AT E Catalysing Al Innovation for Global Leadership
T C
We will develop a comprehensive ecosystem under the IndiaAl mission. driving Al innovation through
collaborative strategic programs and partnerships to position Bharat as a global leader in Al innovation
and build domestic capacities to ensure tech sovereignty
Graphene Mission
We will strengthen the Graphene -based technology programmes to develop more use cases and
applications
Quantum Tech Frontier
We will operationalise the National Quantum Mission to position Bharat as a global leader in quantum
technology, harnessing its potential to revolutionise various sectors and spearhead technological
innovation
Achieving Geospatial Data Excellence
We will create a national geospatial data registry and geospatial data exchange that will enable
industries and startups for innovative products and services
Establishing Science Parks
We will establish science parks in various cities to ensure that the spirit of scientific inquiry is within
reach of Bharat's youth
Launching National Atmospheric Mission
We will launch a National Atmospheric Mission to be called Mausam to make Bharat "weather ready and
'climate smart
A
1
66

--- Page 69 ---
MODI
KI
GUARANTEE FOR
SUSTAINABLE
BHARAT
World has noticed the concept of LIFE Lifestyle for Environment A given by Prime
|
Minister Shri Narendra Modi. This vision is complemented by focussed execution of all
dimensions of environment management . We stand committed to lead the world in |
sustainable living F We will use both traditional wisdom as well as modern practices to
contribute to a healthier planet 2
Y
Increasing non -fossil fuel capacity
Due to our focus on the environment we have reached 44% of our electricity generation capacity from
non -fossil fuel sources We will continue on this path and increase the share of non -fossil fuel sources in
line with Panchamrit We will work towards achieving net zero emissions by 2070
t Revitalising Bharat's Rivers
Building on the experience of Namam Gange, we will undertake phase wise improvement of
health and cleanliness of all maior rivers
By leveraging traditional knowledge alongside modern techniques, we will integrate check
dam construction. Amrit Sarovar construction. and basin management into the National River
Conservation Plan. Through this. the conservation and regeneration of basins of all maior
rivers will be accelerated
We will support state governments in developing systems to treat water contaminated with
arsenic mercury, industrial pollutants, or other naturally occurring issues A ensuring
comprehensive water quality management
M
67

--- Page 70 ---
Improving Air Quality
G
We have initiated the National Clean Air Program framework aimed at reducing air pollution across 131
cities. Further we will ensure that the NCAP effectively achieves and maintains the designated annual
average ambient air quality standards in all regions of the nation 1. especially achieving National Air
Quality Standards in 60 Cities by 2029
A Promoting Afforestation and Agroforestry
a We are committed to achieving the target of a carbon sink by enhancing the tree cover
i We will launch the Green Aravalli Project, a green corridor to protect and preserve biodiversity
in the region and combat desertification
d Protecting Himalavan Ecology
Considering the fragile nature of the Himalayan ecology and the increase in the frequency and intensity
of natural disasters in the region we will undertake a holistic approach towards disaster mitigation and
1.
strengthening of disaster resilience in the Himalayan States
Developing Coastal Climate Resilience
We will safeguard our coastal communities and ecosystems by building resilience against climate change
and its threats.
Expanding Green Credit Programme
We will continue our lead in the Green Credit Programme by expanding the scope of activities to fulfil
the decarbonization requirements.
a
6
T
1
68

--- Page 71 ---
Achieving Disaster Resilient Bharat
|
We will strive to achieve a disaster- resilient Bharat with minimum casualties and losses due to natural
disasters by evolving appropriate technical and policy initiatives.
C % Managing Human Animal Conflict
I
We will work with state governments and all stakeholders to sensitively manage human -animal conflict
in areas close to forests
I Initiating National E Waste Management Programme
*
We will launch a series of programmes to address the growing concern over safe disposal of e-waste
Promoting Sustainable Living
We will strengthen Mission LIFE establishing a comprehensive repository encompassing both traditional
and contemporary best practices, and fostering the global adoption of environmentally friendly
lifestyles to promote sustainable living across the globe
( Promoting Recycling
a
We will promote recycling programmes across the country. We will institutionalise recycling mandates
across sectors to maximise mineral recovery from used products.
Protect the Environment through Various Schemes
We have started multiple programmes to protect the environment like PM Surya Ghar Yojana, Railway
Electrification PM e o Bus, promotion of EVs, Ethanol and Bio-fuel promotion among others. Through
1.
these programmes S. our citizens will benefit from the opportunity to live in a clean environment
TY
69

--- Page 72 ---
NOTES

--- Page 73 ---
NOTES

--- Page 74 ---
|
|
|
I
I
= |

--- Page 75 ---
|
I I
E NW
Scan OR code to download
the Sankalp Patra
UO
ModikiGuarantee
Committed to Building Viksit Bharat by 2047
o
Press the lotus button | Make BJP win
